In 'The 3,000 Rice Genome Project' [GigaScience 2014] the authors describe the collection and sequencing of DNA from 3000 accessions of Oryza sativa. The sequencing reads were aligned against the Nipponbare reference genome using the BWA software to produce BAM files. The Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) package was used to identify SNPs and indels in the 3000 genomes. Five random subsets of 200000 SNPs with "minimum missing data" were used to construct Neighbor-Joining trees. Prior information (not clearly specified) was combined with each tree to classify groups as "indica", "aus/boro", "basmati/sadri", and temperate and tropical "japonica".

We downloaded BAM files [source needed from Murat] for 20 rice accessions that included members that had been previously classified into each of the groups. The GATK Haplotype Caller tool was used to generate a gvcf file for each accession, and the GATK GenotypeGVCFs tool was used to generate a full VCF file nominally containing information for every site in the genome. These VCF files were merged and filtered for indels, heterozygous, and uncalled sites. The merged VCF file represents the rice genome sites that were successfully called in all 20 of the chosen rice accessions and contain at least one SNP among them. Further filtering revealed that there were at least two accessions that had a SNP in each of these sites, and that over 75% of the sites had at least four accessions with SNPs.

Ten random subsets of 10000 sites were taken from the merged VCF and used to generate Maximum Likelihood trees with 100 bootstraps using RAxML. These trees were visualized with FigTree [Rambaut] and were all largely similar. They correlated with the tree presented in 'The 3,000 Rice Genomes Project' in that the indica varieties grouped together, the two aus varieties consistently grouped with each other but nearer to the indica group than to the aro variety, the aro variety "grouped" with itself in that it shared a single node with all the other varieties, and the japonica varieties were farthest in the tree from the indica varieties. However, the tropical and temperate subvarieties of japonica did not consistently group with each other in the trees we generated, as seen in the representative tree constructed from 100000 random SNPs and 1000 bootstraps.

The phylogenetic experiment described here loosely agrees with the results of 'The 3,000 Rice Genomes Project' paper. The sub-variety classification of the 20 accessions we studied were not born out, but this might be attributable to a lack of a sufficient number of cultivars to stabilize the sorting of the sub-varieties, or to our use of a maximum likelihood algorithm for treeing (considered generally superior to the much faster Neighbor Joining method [Holder and Lewis, 2003]). However, a more substantial flaw in both this analysis and the one in 'The 3,000 Rice Genomes Project' is that rice varieties are not all related to each other in a tree-like structure. As members of the same species, and an especially highly-bred one at that, their relationships would be more accurately represented as a net, a fact that will not be captured by current phylogenetic software. Nevertheless, the methods used here should be adequate to give a general sense of the relative distances between the cultivars studied, and this particular experiment supports the hypothesis that the 20 chosen accessions are reasonably representative of the genetic breadth of the 3K Rice Genome Project.
